Stocks tend to follow the broader economy not just the stocks themselves meaning they are cyclical. This can be defined by two factors of optimism and growth added with fear of recession. 
Interest rate expectations are deeply tied to perception of direction. Rising rates link to bullish psychology (linked to optimism confidence and risk tolerance) whilst falling rates are linked to bearish psychology (rooted in risk aversion and pessimism). 
Fear and trust is a big part of it including solvency, liquidity and regulation. Loss aversion is a concept of fear when losses loom larger than gains which was first introduced in the prospect theory of 1979 showing people make decisions based off loses and gains rather than final outcomes. 
Anchoring is where stocks are viewed as plays with investors being anchored to low price to earnings and low price to book values. 
News flow heavily affects this when traders tend to pile into trades based off of headlines called narrative driven psychology. This is refers to stories shaping investments instead of the data changing how people think and feel and decide which stocks to invest in. 
Information processing- provides new information to reassess a company or the economic future value. Rational reaction is where investors update their expectations based on the news. This tends to find overreactions and underreaction within the market. If this news is overestimated then can lead to panic buying or selling’s of stock with the opposite happening for an underestimation. 
Cognitive biases- Bias can affect the influences in investor behaviour. Confirmation bias means investors pay more attention to news that confirms their beliefs so if they agree this internalises the confirmation. Availability Heuristic means recent or vivid stories seem more important even when they aren’t. 
Herd behaviour- people follow the crowd especially within uncertain environments like stocks. News triggers a reaction from investors whilst others assume movement within stocks assumes the crowd knows something they don’t creating momentum which amplifies stocks to move up or down coincidently. 
Emotions- this can trigger logic to go out the window. Emotional volatility of markets is why news can cause sharp and sometimes irrational price swings. Also the way in which media is framed can influence interpretation. This can stir overly optimistic responses. Repeated coverage can also amplify the importance of the stock creating a greater perceived importance than it actually is. 
Expectations vs reality- stocks move based off expectations not just facts which means news only affects stock prices when its different form what investors anticipated. 
Stocks are all influenced by bias emotion and social behaviour. 
Biases- there are 10 ten in which can affect this-
1.	Loss aversion
Losses feeling bigger than gains meaning stocks are sold prematurely and loose gains. This contributes to poor portfolio performance and irrationally holding behaviour. 
2.	Confirmation bias
This is tendency to seek information that confirms pre existing beliefs. This means data is ignored that challenges your investment thesis. This reinforces bad decisions and ensure bullish narratives are followed. 
3.	Overconfidence bias
This is where there is a belief that ones abilities are better than they are. This means excessive trading ignoring risk and having poor diversification driving volatility and momentum of trades. 
4.	Anchoring bias
This is relying too heavily on the firs piece of information that has been presented. This can lead on to holding onto stock for too long which can slow reactions to new and more relevant information. 
5.	Herding bias
This is copying the behaviour of the majority especially during uncertainty. This can be chasing hot stocks without due diligence. This drives bubbles and causes market crashes. 
6.	FOMO
This is fear of missing out and is an anxiety in which you believe others are gaining and you’re not. This can be jumping into something too late or overpaying for hype. 
7.	Recency bias
This is overweighting of recent evets or data or averages of all of the data. This means they believe that recent performance will continue indefinitely causing a misjudging risk. 
8.	Disposition effect
This is selling assets that have gained while keeping ones which have lost value. This causes the opposite of rational profit maximisation slowing price corrections in losing assets and accelerating gains in winners. 
9.	Narrative bias
Letting emotionally compelling stories override data or logic due to the connection felt. This is investing in hype and trends which can distort valuation and lead to speculative bubbles
10.	Availability bias 
Overestimating the likelihood of events that are recent or easy to recall. This can cause assumptions to be made like one bad earning meaning a company is doomed. This can amplify volatility and short-termism. 
Reduce this bias by-
1.	Using checklists
2.	Journal your trades
3.	Focus on process not outcome
4.	Diversify resources
5.	Zoom out 
Key emotions that affect stocks
1.	Fear
Triggers panic selling, withdrawal from risk or freezing
2.	Greed
Encourages chasing gains overtrading or excessive risk taking
3.	FOMO
Drives investors to jump late into stocks often near the top 
4.	Hope
Causes investors to hold onto losing positions expecting a turnaround
5.	Regret
Leads to hesitation in making trades of new or even revenge trading
6.	Overconfidence
Makes investors believe they are right despite data to the contrary. 
All of this follows the classic curve. 
Social behaviour-
1.	Herding
2.	FOMO
3.	Echo chambers and groupthink- can happen in news and social media reinforcing the wrong ideas even if theyre wrong. This can lead to biased decisions and resistance to contrary information. 
4.	Social proof- when people are unsure they look to others for answers in what to do. These actions are looked at as evidence of whats right and can ignore personal analysis and thesis. 
5.	Panic selling 

